Alexander Lodygin
Alexander Nikolayevich Lodygin (Russian: Александр Николаевич Лодыгин; October 18, 1847 – March 16, 1923) was a Russian electrical engineer and inventor.
Alexander Nikolayevich Lodygin was born in Stenshino village, Tambov Governorate, Russian Empire. His parents were of a very old and noble family (descendants of Andrei Kobyla like Romanovs), but of very moderate means. He studied at the Tambov Cadet School (1859–1865). Then he served in the 71st Belev regiment, and in 1866–1868 studied at the Moscow Infantry School. Soon after graduation from his military school he retired from the military and worked as a worker at the Tula weapons factory.


== Timeline ==
1872: He decided to go to Saint Petersburg to attend lectures at Saint Petersburg Institute of Technology and to start working on an electrical
1899: Petersburg Institute of Electrical Engineering awarded Lodygin with the honorary title of electrical engineer.
1875: From here on he was very interested in the socialist ideas of the Narodniks.
1880s: After Narodniks killed Emperor Alexander II of Russia, there were repressions against their organization.
1884: As a result, he had to emigrate from Russia to France and USA.
1895: He married the German reporter Alma Schmidt, the daughter of an
1907: Lodygin returned to Russia. He continued work on a series of his inventions, including a new type of electrical motor, electrical welding, tungsten alloys, electrical ovens and smelting furnaces. He taught at Petersburg Institute of Electrical Engineering and worked for the Petersburg railroad.
1914: He was sent by the Ministry of Agriculture to develop plans for electrification of Olonets and Nizhny Novgorod governorates.
After the February Revolution Lodygin emigrated to USA. Because of health problems he declined a Soviet offer to work for their State Plan for Electrification of Russia (1918).
1923: He died in Brooklyn in New York.
Several Lodygin's ideas were implemented much later, even after his death. In 1871 Lodygin proposed an autonomous diving apparatus that consisted of a steel mask, natural rubber costume, accumulator battery and a special apparatus for electrolysis of water. The diver was supposed to breathe the oxygen-hydrogen mix obtained by electrolysis of water. The invented diving apparatus was very similar to modern scuba equipment


== References ==


== External links ==
Site of Lodygin's museum in Tambov
http://home.frognet.net/~ejcov/lodyguine.html (with a list of US Patents)