Comfort A. Adams
Comfort Avery Adams (November 1, 1868 – February 21, 1958) was an American electrical engineer who as a student helped Albert A. Michelson with the Michelson-Morley experiment (1887), which was later viewed as confirming the special relativity theory of Albert Einstein (1905). He was a recipient of the IEEE Edison Medal and AIEE Lamme Medal.


== Biography ==
"Doc Adams", as he was commonly addressed by his colleagues and friends, received his Honorary Doctorate of Engineering from his alma mater, Case School of Applied Science, in 1925 after having been on the faculty at Harvard College and dean of their engineering school for almost 35 years. He later received his second honorary doctorate from Lehigh University in 1939. By that time he had retired from Harvard. In terms of an all-around American engineer in the early 20th century, Comfort A. Adams comes the closest to being America's answer to Britain's I. K. Brunel.
Adams was president of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers and the American Welding Society. He organized and chaired the Welding Research Council.


== Honors and awards ==
Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1906)
Honorary Doctor of Engineering from Case School of Applied Science 1925
Honorary Doctor of Engineering from Lehigh University (1939)
Lamme Medalist of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers (1940)
IEEE Edison Medal (1956)
Delivered the first of the series of Adams Lectures founded in his honor by the American Welding Society
Samuel Wylie Miller Medal of the American Welding Society (first recipient)
Long-time member of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Committee, then Honorary Member
Honorary Member of the International Acetylene Association
Member of the National Academy of Sciences


== Memberships ==
American Institute of Electrical Engineers
American Society of Mechanical Engineers
American Society of Civil Engineers
American Standards Association
American Engineering Council
American Society for Metals
American Society for Testing and Materials
Society for Promotion of Engineering Education
American Physical Society
British Institute of Electrical Engineering
Verband Deutscher Electrotechniker
Société Française des Electriciens
Sigma Xi
Tau Beta Pi


== Club memberships ==
Harvard Faculty Club, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Engineers Club, New York
Engineers' Club of Philadelphia
Cedarbrook Country Club, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania


== References ==


== External links ==
Biography
National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoir