Energy economics
Energy economics is a broad scientific subject area which includes topics related to supply and use of energy in societies. Due to diversity of issues and methods applied and shared with a number of academic disciplines, energy economics does not present itself as a self-contained academic discipline, but it is an applied subdiscipline of economics. From the list of main topics of economics, some relate strongly to energy economics:
Econometrics
Environmental economics
Finance
Industrial organization
Microeconomics
Macroeconomics
Resource economics
Energy economics also draws heavily on results of energy engineering, geology, political sciences, ecology etc. Recent focus of energy economics includes the following issues:
Climate change and climate policy
Risk analysis and security of supply
Sustainability
Energy markets and electricity markets - liberalisation, (de- or re-) regulation
Demand response
Energy and economic growth
Economics of energy infrastructure
Environmental policy
Energy policy
Energy derivatives
Forecasting energy demand
Elasticity of supply and demand in energy market
Energy elasticity
Some institutions of higher education (universities) recognise energy economics as a viable career opportunity, offering this as a curriculum. The University of Cambridge, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam are the top three research universities, and Resources for the Future the top research institute. There are numerous other research departments, companies and professionals offering energy economics studies and consultations.


== History ==

Energy related issues have been actively present in economic literature since the 1973 oil crisis, but have their roots much further back in the history. As early as 1865, W.S. Jevons expressed his concern about the eventual depletion of coal resources in his book The Coal Question. One of the best known early attempts to work on the economics of exhaustible resources (incl. fossil fuel) was made by H. Hotelling, who derived a price path for non-renewable resources, known as Hotelling's rule.


== Sources, links and portals ==
Leading journals of energy economics include:
Energy Economics
The Energy Journal
Resource and Energy Economics
There are several other journals that regularly publish papers in energy economics:
Energy -- The International Journal
Energy Policy
International Journal of Global Energy Issues
Utilities Policy
There is also a handbook in three volumes.
Much progress in energy economics has been made through the conferences of the International Association for Energy Economics, the model comparison exercises of the (Stanford) Energy Modeling Forum and the meetings of the International Energy Workshop.
IDEAS/RePEc has a list of energy economists, a ranking of the same, and a collection of recent working papers.


== Leading Energy Economists ==
Lutz Kilian
David M Newbery
Ian Harper
Subhes Bhattacharyya
Bhuvaneshwari Balasubramanian


== Further reading ==
How to Measure the True Cost of Fossil Fuels March 30, 2013 Scientific American
Bhattacharyya, S. (2011). Energy Economics: Concepts, Issues, Markets, and Governance. London: Springer-Verlag limited.
Herberg, Mikkal (2014). Energy Security and the Asia-Pacific: Course Reader. United States: The National Bureau of Asian Research.


== See also ==


== References ==