IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society
The IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society (OES) is a society of the IEEE. In the hierarchy of IEEE, the OES is one of close to 40 technical societies organized under the IEEE's Technical Activities Board. OES is tasked with being scientific, literary, and educational in character. It promotes close cooperation and exchange of technical information among its members through publications and meetings. OES actively strives for the advancement of the theory and practice of electrotechnology, allied branches of engineering, and related arts and sciences, applied to all bodies of water; and the maintenance of high professional and ethical standards among its members and affiliates. International meetings and conferences are hosted each year to facilitate information exchange and networking.
OES oversees the publication of one scholarly journal and publishes the OES Newsletter.
In pursuit of its educational objective, IEEE OES hosts a student scholarship program awarding multiple $2000.00 scholarships twice yearly. Students must be enrolled full-time in an accredited college or university in a field of study that will lead to a career in ocean engineering or a related ocean science field. Recipients of the awards are invited to attend the following OCEANS Conference to be recognized at the OES Awards Luncheon.


== Activities ==
OES is actively pursuing its objectives in its local chapters as well as in the international arena. It hosts workshops, symposiums, and conferences on both the regional and international level. Its publications reach out to its membership and other in related fields. The Society reaches out to the future through its scholarship program and student poster competitions.


=== Publications ===
The Oceanic Engineering Society oversees the publication of one scholarly journal, publishes the OES Newsletter and an Electronic Newsletter.
IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, ISSN 0364-9059
The IEEE-JOE, begun in 1976, is a quarterly journal whose field of interest includes all aspects of science, engineering and technology that address research, development, and operations pertaining to all bodies of water. This includes the creation of new capabilities and technologies from concept design through prototypes, testing and operational systems to sense, explore, analyze, understand, develop, use and responsibly manage natural resources.
OES Beacon
The OES newsletter is published quarterly. Issues highlight recent conferences, student poster competition winners, chapter activities, and other articles of interest.
Electronic Newsletter
The Electronic Newsletter is released periodically to keep the membership abreast of current events.


=== Conferences ===
OCEANS Conferences –OCEANS conferences are co-sponsored by OES and the Marine Technology Society (MTS). Each has an extensive schedule of technical presentations, vendor displays and a Student Poster Competition. Recent OCEANS conferences: OCEANS ’11 IEEE Santander “Oceans of Energy for a Sustainable Future” took place in Santander, Spain June 6–9, 2011 and OCEANS ’11 MTS/IEEE Kona “Oceans of Opportunity: International Cooperation & Partnerships across the Pacific" Kona, Hawaii September 19–22, 2011.
Other conferences and symposiums of the past and future include: AUV 2011, Electric Ship Technologies Symposium, US-EU-Baltic Symposium, the Arctic Technology Conference and the Waterside Security Conference 2010. 


=== Chapters ===
Chapters are an integral part of the Society and allow OES members an opportunity to meet for scientific, educational, and networking purposes with fellow engineers in the Oceanic Technology field. Chapters are a part of the local IEEE Section and work with the Section to promote the aims of IEEE. A Chapter can be organized with a minimum of 12 OES members. Chapters are currently in the following locales:
Canadian Atlantic Newfoundland-Labrador, Canada Ottawa, Canada (Joint Chapter) Quebec, Canada (Joint Chapter) Toronto, Canada (Joint Chapter) Victoria, Canada France Japan New South Wales, Australia Norway Singapore Spain Taipei, Taiwan United Kingdom and Ireland (Joint Chapter) Boston, Massachusetts, USA Washington DC & Northern Virginia, USA Chicago, Illinois (Joint Chapter), USA Houston, Texas, USA San Diego, California, USA Seattle, Washington, USA Honolulu, Hawaii, USA 


== See also ==
Acoustical Society of America
Marine Technology Society
IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society
IEEE Signal Processing Society
Global Earth Observation System of Systems


== References ==
^ "IEEE Societies, Councils and Technical Communities". Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Retrieved 2009-05-02. 
^ "IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society Constitution". Retrieved 2011-02-07. 
^ "IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society". Retrieved 2011-02-07. 
^ "IEEE/OES Scholarship Program". Retrieved 2011-02-07. 
^ "IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering". IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society. Retrieved 2006-09-06. 
^ "IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering". IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society. Retrieved 2011-02-07. 
^ "IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering". IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society. Retrieved 2011-02-07. 
^ "IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering". IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society. Retrieved 2011-02-07. 
^ "Conferences". IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society. Retrieved 2011-02-16. 
^ "Chapters". IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society. Retrieved 2011-02-16. 


== External links ==
The Oceanic Engineering Society's Website