IEEE Broadcast Technology Society
The IEEE Broadcast Technology Society (IEEE BTS) is a long-established professional society of the IEEE.


== History ==
The IRE Audio Professional Group was formed on June 2, 1948, and the Broadcast Engineers Group was later approved on July 7, 1948. The group changed their name to the IRE Professional Group on Broadcast Transmission Systems in August 1949, which later became the IRE Professional Group on Broadcasting. The Professional Group on Broadcasting was structured in a fashion very similar to the current structure of the Broadcast Technology Society, with an Administrative Committee and Chapters in many major cities.


== Field of Interest ==
[Broadcasting] is a one-to-many communication service in which the transmissions are intended for direct reception by the general public or a target audience, which may include audio, video and/or data services. The field of interest of the IEEE Broadcast Technology Society (BTS) shall encompass devices, equipment, techniques, and systems related to [broadcast] technology, including the production, distribution, wired and wireless transmission, propagation aspects and reception.
BTS began in 1912 with the formation of the Institute of Radio Engineers (IRE). The Audio Professional Group was formed on June 2, 1948, and the Broadcast Engineers Group was the second one to be approved on July 7,1948. The name was changed in August, 1949, to the IRE Professional Group on Broadcast Transmission Systems. The name was later changed to the IRE Professional Group on Broadcasting. It was structured much the same as the Broadcast Technology Society is today, with an Administrative Committee and Chapters in major cities. The merger of the AIEE and the IRE was accomplished in January, 1963 to form the IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers). The Professional Group system was carried over to the new organization, and the broadcast activity was identified as the IEEE Professional Technical Group on Broadcasting, and later as the IEEE Group on Broadcasting. In 1976 the IEEE was organized into Societies, and broadcasting became a part of the IEEE Broadcast, Cable and Consumer Electronics Society. To respond to the more complex society structure and increased business activities, the Society established an Executive Office in 2001.


== Publications ==
IEEE BTS publishes several journals and newsletters that focus on its field of interest, including:
IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting
IEEE Journal of Display Technology
IEEE/OSA Journal of Display Technology
IEEE Broadcast Technology Society Newsletter


== Conferences ==
The society sponsors or co-sponsors a broad range of international conferences and symposiums that are widely attended on an annual basis. These include:
IEEE Broadcast Symposium
IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB)


== References ==
^ IEEE Global History Network (2011). "IEEE Broadcast Technology Society History". IEEE History Center. Retrieved 26 February 2014.