IEEE Electromagnetic Compatibility Society
The IEEE Electromagnetic Compatibility Society (EMCS) is an organizational unit and professional society of academic professors and applied engineers with a common interest, affiliated with the IEEE. The 50-year-old Society has members and chapters in nearly every country throughout the world. As an active entity within the IEEE, benefits are provided to members as detailed below.


== Field of interest ==
The electromagnetic compatibility field of interest is on engineering related to the electromagnetic environmental effects of systems to be compatible with themselves and their intended operating environment.
These areas include: standards, measurement techniques and test procedures, instrumentation, equipment and systems characteristics, interference control techniques and components, education, computational analysis, and spectrum management, along with scientific, technical, industrial, professional or other activities that contribute to this field.


== History ==
Fifty years ago, a small group of electrical engineers and associated technical people realized it would be a prudent step to organize a group of individuals dedicated to Radio Frequency Interference (RFI). Two different sets of individuals, one on the West Coast of the United States and the other on the East Coast, began to discuss organizational considerations, generated signed petitions, and met with officials of the Institute of Radio Engineers (IRE) in [New York City].
These early efforts culminated in a formal petition to the Institute of Radio Engineers (IRE) on 3 July 1957, requesting the formation of an Institute of Radio Engineers Professional Group on Radio Frequency Interference (RFI). This petition, which included a scope of technical interest, was approved by the IRE on 10 October 1957.
The first meeting of the Administrative Committee of the newly formed group was held on 20 November 1957 in Asbury Park, New Jersey. Officers were elected and the group was operations.
The Professional Groups on Radio Frequency Interference became the Professional Group on RFI in the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) in 1963 when the IRE and the American Institute of Electrical Engineers merged. Within five years, the Professional Group became the EMC Society of the IEEE, a name that has remained constant for 40 years.
In 2007, the IEEE EMC Society celebrated its 50th anniversary at their yearly conference in Honolulu, Hawaii. To help celebrate, the Society’s celebration pin was flown in space shuttle mission, STS-118 (August 8–21, 2007). This pin is mounted in a frame with a photograph of the astronauts, officers of the EMC Society, and is on display at the IEEE Headquarter office in Piscataway, New Jersey, History Center.


== Today’s IEEE EMC Society ==
The IEEE EMC Society has evolved into an international, professional society within the IEEE. The Society has 65 chapters worldwide and membership of approximately 4,000 (as of June 2008). The governing body is identified as the Board of Directors consisting of a President, five Vice Presidents, and Directors-at-Large elected by the membership.
Benefits to both members and non-members interested in the IEEE EMC Society includes:
A Transactions (or Journal) on Electromagnetic Compatibility
A quarterly newsletter
An annual symposium or conference
Chapter development program
Eleven technical committees
Professional committees related to education, standards and third-party organizations
A distinguished lecturer program
Details on the above programs are found on the society’s web site: www.emcs.org.
The EMC Society is organized into different areas of interest, each with a Vice President who oversees operational aspects under his/her leadership.
Member Services
Technical Services
Communication Services
Conferences
Standards


== Technical committees ==
There are eleven Technical Committees of the IEEE EMC Society along with several specialized committees. These committees provide technical guidance to the Board of Directors and the general membership. Each of the technical committees provides expertise in a particular technical area while other committees have a focus on Society operations worldwide.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
IEEE