IEEE Signal Processing Society
The IEEE Signal Processing Society is a society of the IEEE. It is also known by the acronym IEEE SPS. In the hierarchy of IEEE, the Signal Processing Society is one of close to 40 technical societies organized under the IEEE's Technical Activities Board. The IEEE Signal Processing Society is IEEE's first technical Society.
From the IEEE SPS web site, the mission of the society is defined to be :
"The IEEE Signal Processing Society is an international organization whose purpose is to: advance and disseminate state-of-the-art scientific information and resources; educate the signal processing community; and provide a venue for people to interact and exchange ideas."
and the field of interest is defined to be:
"Signal processing is the enabling technology for the generation, transformation, extraction, and interpretation of information. It comprises the theory, algorithms with associated architectures and implementations, and applications related to processing information contained in many different formats broadly designated as signals. Signal processing uses mathematical, statistical, computational, heuristic, and/or linguistic representations, formalisms, modeling techniques and algorithms for generating, transforming, transmitting, and learning from signals."


== History ==
The Signal Processing society was formed in 1948 as the Professional Group on Audio of the Institute of Radio Engineers.


== Activities ==
The Society organizes many conferences every year and operates local chapters around the world. It coordinates the operation of several councils, task forces, and technical committees.


=== Publications ===
The Signal Processing Society oversees the publication of nine periodicals, including a magazine, newsletter and scholarly journals:
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing
IEEE Signal Processing Letters
IEEE Signal Processing Magazine
Inside Signal Processing e-Newsletter
IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing
IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing
Co-sponsored journals include:
IEEE Computing in Science and Engineering Magazine
IEEE MultiMedia Magazine
IEEE Sensors Journal
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications
Digital Library:
Signal Processing electronic Library (SPeL)
The IEEE Signal Processing electronic Library (SPeL) is a comprehensive electronic collection of more than 50 years of the IEEE Signal Processing Society's periodicals, which includes all four transactions and letters, newsletters, magazines, and technical proceedings of the two major Society conferences and of most workshops. IEEE SPeL also features four joint transactions, which the Society is a partner. The library collection is available on three DVD-ROMs. It has a search engine, which allows searches based on full-text, as well as searches by such fields as author, title, subject and date. The collection provides a comprehensive database, which contains information about the technical articles that are published in the Society's journals


=== Conferences ===
The Society organizes, sponsors, and co-sponsors numerous conferences and workshops every year. A list of them can be found here.


== See also ==
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP)
International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP)
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI)
International Symposium on Signal Processing and Information Technology (ISSPIT)
International Conference on Signal and Image Processing (SIPS)
International Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN)


== References ==
^ "IEEE Societies, Councils and Technical Communities". Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Retrieved 2009-05-01. 
^ IEEE Global History Network (2011). "IEEE Signal Processing Society History". IEEE History Center. Retrieved 7 July 2011. 
^ "SPS Periodicals". IEEE Signal Processing Society. Retrieved 2009-05-01. 


== External links ==
The Signal Processing Society's Website