Occupations in electrical/electronics engineering
The field of electrical and electronics engineering has grown to include many related disciplines and occupations.
The Dictionary of Occupational Titles lists a number of occupations in electrical/electronics engineering. It describes them as concerned with applications of the laws of electrical energy and the principles of engineering for the generation, transmission and use of electricity, as well as the design and development of machinery and equipment for the production and utilization of electrical power:
electrical engineer
electrical test engineer
electrical design engineer
electrical-prospecting engineer (alternate title: electrical engineer, geophysical prospecting)
electrical-research engineer
electronics engineer
electronics-design engineer
electronics-research engineer
electronics-test engineer
illuminating engineer
planning engineer, central office facilities (tel. & tel.)
supervisor, drafting and printed circuit design
sales-engineer, electrical products
sales-engineer, electronics products and systems
electrical technician (alternate title: electrical-laboratory technician)
electronics technician
technician, semiconductor development
cable engineer, outside plant (tel. & tel.)
distribution-field engineer (utilities) (alternate title: line inspector)
electrical engineer, power system (utilities) (alternate title: power engineer)
electrolysis-and-corrosion-control engineer (alternate titles: corrosion-control specialist; corrosion engineer; electrolysis engineer; electrolysis investigator)
engineer of system development (utilities) (alternate titles: development-and-planning engineer; planning engineer; system-planning engineer)
engineer-in-charge, studio operations (radio-TV broad.) (alternate titles: chief engineer; chief engineer, broadcasting operations; transmission engineer)
engineer-in-charge, transmitter (radio-TV broad.) (alternate titles: director of engineering; engineer, chief; transmitter engineer)
induction-coordination power engineer (utilities)
outside-plant engineer (tel. & tel.)
power-distribution engineer (utilities) (alternate title: electric-distribution engineer)
power-transmission engineer (utilities) (alternate titles: electrical-transmission engineer; transmission-and-coordination engineer; transmission-line engineer)
protection engineer (utilities)
supervisor, microwave (radio-TV broad.)
transmission-and-protection engineer (tel. & tel.) (alternate title: transmission engineer)
engineering manager, electronics
central-office equipment engineer (tel. & tel.)
commercial engineer (radio-TV broad.) (alternate title: traffic engineer)
customer-equipment engineer (tel. & tel.) (alternate title: services engineer)
instrumentation technician
controls designer (alternate title: controls project engineer)
integrated circuit layout designer (alternate title: mask designer)
printed circuit designer
drafter, electrical
drafter, electronic (alternate title: drafter, electromechanical)
design technician, computer-aided (electron. comp.) alternate title: digitizer)
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) has developed specialized groups ("societies") which professionals can join according to their specialization:
aerospace and electronic systems
antennas and propagation
broadcast technology
circuits and systems
communications
components, packaging, and manufacturing technology
computational intelligence
computers
consumer electronics
control systems
dielectrics and electrical insulation
electron devices
electromagnetic compatibility
engineering in medicine and biology
geoscience and remote sensing
industrial electronics
industry applications
information theory
instrumentation and measurement
intelligent transportation systems
magnetics
microwave theory and techniques
nuclear and plasma sciences
oceanic engineering
photonics
power electronics
power and energy
product safety engineering
reliability
robotics and automation
signal processing
solid-state circuits
systems, man, and cybernetics
ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control
vehicular technology


== References ==